[Music]
hi everyone my name is dr mark eatonson
i'm a licensed psychologist specializing
in the treatment of pathological
narcissism and related issues and also
author of the book unmasking narcissism
a guide to understanding the narcissist
in your life
available on amazon and at major book
retailers the book's a hands-on guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism from an empathic and
compassionate perspective
so a number of listeners have commented
on how difficult it is to find a good
therapist to treat narcissistic issues
and some have also asked if therapy is
really necessary
so today i'd like to address both of
those issues
first i'll discuss the relative lack of
therapists who really understand
narcissism and i'll also make some
suggestions about where you might find
ones that do
i'll also discuss why i think therapy is
necessary for healing in my opinion it's
only possible to get just so far down
the path by yourself
pathological narcissism is created in
our early relationships and it's best
healed through the experience of a
positive corrective relationship with a
qualified therapist so let's start with
the shocking lack of qualified
therapists who treat this disorder there
are plenty of clinicians who specialize
in working with individuals who have
been hurt or abused by someone with npd
but it seems that only a handful of
therapists actually specialize in
working with narcissists themselves
of those an even smaller number actually
seem to understand the psychology of
narcissism
i'm sometimes asked to provide an expert
review of new books on the topic of
narcissism and i have yet to see a draft
that doesn't pick the very low hanging
fruit of characterizing narcissists as
quote evil
likewise most of the information online
is heavily slanted in the direction of
pathologizing and othering people with
this disorder
treating npd as a one-dimensional straw
man rather than a complex trauma-based
variant of human psychology i spend more
time than i'd like defending myself
against people who seem to believe that
the only permissible thing to say when
it comes to narcissism is
those people are terrible all of this is
to say that when it comes to narcissism
there's a fair bit of confusion and it
can be difficult to find a therapist
whose knowledge of npd can't be summed
up by a dsm checklist something they
heard from a colleague about a difficult
patient or an article they read on
psychologytoday.com
i vividly recall sitting in a case
consultation group a number of years ago
a colleague was presenting a case that
had them stumped
and i commented that the patient sounded
narcissistic
the colleague gave my comment a cursory
acknowledgement but didn't really seem
to take it seriously so i repeated my
observation i actually repeated it two
more times
finally they turned to me and they
exclaimed yes i get it they're
narcissistic but how does that help me
and it was then that i realized that my
colleague only understood narcissism as
an insult
something derogatory to say to someone
who's behaving selfishly meanwhile i was
thinking of it as a personality style
based on comprehensible relational
trauma that has clear implications for
the course of treatment
my colleague simply thought i was
calling their patient a name and sadly
this perspective is quite common among
mental health professionals
even the ones who purportedly specialize
in npd often come from a decidedly
surface level skills-based paradigm and
they don't really understand the
psychology of the people they're
treating
and in my opinion anyone who really
understands narcissism sees it as a
tragic disorder based in unfathomable
loss and betrayal of the child's most
basic needs for unconditional love and
positive regard
the author stephen johnson calls
narcissists used children and i have yet
to hear a more apt description of course
there are also plenty of internet
experts on narcissism and some of them
even have formal training in psychology
but most of them also opt for the
familiar stigmatizing approach in their
treatment of the topic it's much more
difficult and sadly rare
to find someone who can balance the
humanity of all involved and discuss the
complexities of pathological narcissism
as both a psychological phenomenon that
afflicts individuals and as a relational
phenomenon that afflicts groups or pairs
of people the nature of narcissistic
pathology is to collapse psychological
and emotional space to defend against
shame and vulnerability this defense is
called splitting
i'm good you're bad
it's both comforting and regressive to
view the world in shades of black and
white how ironic then that almost all of
the information out there about this
disorder engages in the same regressive
maneuver portraying complex relational
dynamics in oversimplified terms of doer
and done to
so what's a person to do
i know for a fact that there are many
people out there who struggle with
narcissism and who also want help i see
them in my practice
i get emails from them on a daily basis
i read their comments on my videos
there are large internet forums where
narcissists try to support each other on
the path to healing
all of this somehow goes unseen by both
the lay public
and the mental health establishment
where the common wisdom is that
narcissists don't want help they don't
seek help and they can't be helped
and to be fair
this portrayal is sometimes true but the
same could be said for almost any other
mental illness
there is always a subset of treatment
resistant patients who simply don't want
or can't accept help
there are always individuals who are too
defended who reject the well-meant
attempts by their loved ones to tell
them that they have a problem that
something is wrong
such thick-headedness is in no way
unique to narcissists and in my
experience there are many narcissists
out there who want help so what should
they do
where should they turn to find help that
isn't about making them swallow the
narrative that they're terrible people
and that the only quote cure is to
basically cease to exist
as you might be able to tell this topic
is incredibly frustrating to me
the material is there for anyone to read
very smart people have been writing
about this disorder for over a hundred
years
it wasn't until the 21st century that
the literature on narcissism took a
decidedly ugly turn in the direction of
vilification and stigmatization
heinz kohut created an entire branch of
psychological theory and technique based
around the idea that narcissists are
human beings who have sustained a
comprehensible and tragic wound an early
relational trauma that set them against
themselves and left them without the
basic psychological tools they need to
evaluate their experience in balanced
and realistic ways
more importantly his ideas are rooted in
the recognition that narcissism is about
deficits not the presence of some
malignant pathology
there's a legacy of mainstream
psychological theory dating back to the
mid-20th century that provides a
compassionate perspective on the
disorder while not losing sight of the
maladaptive aspects of npd that require
intervention the simple fact is that
clinicians used to know how to treat
narcissism
they used to understand it
then the dsm disorder got redefined in
the mid-1980s turning npd into the
caricature disorder we see today
ungrounded in actual human psychology
untethered to the subjective distress
and suffering that normally defines
mental illness
basically a two-dimensional list of
superficial traits that only describe a
narrow variant of npd and make it almost
impossible to conceptualize actually
treating the disorder
i could go on about this at length and i
have in some of my videos on the heel
npd youtube channel
more importantly i'm not the only one
making these criticisms
there are numerous articles in major
peer-reviewed journals in the last 15
years leveling these same complaints
much more articulately than i ever could
and i want to be clear that this isn't
just a frustrated rant
the point i'm trying to make is that
modern psychology has gone off the rails
to a certain extent when it comes to npd
to find someone who can treat this
disorder effectively you need to look
outside the usual channels
specifically i'm talking about finding
clinicians who know and utilize
psychoanalytic methods in their practice
i know psychoanalysis has gotten a bad
reputation but then again so has npd and
i assume you're beginning to see how
npd's reputation is
somewhat distorted
if you have preconceived ideas about
psychoanalytic theory and technique then
i ask you to suspend them for a few
minutes
because i assure you
that this reputation is similarly
distorted
psychoanalysis has come a very long way
since the days of sigmund freud
i teach a course on the topic to
doctoral students
at the beginning of the course i asked
them to share their ideas what have they
heard what were they taught
always i hear the same critiques
it's not scientific
it's basic assumptions about the mind
are unfalsifiable it's basically a cult
etc
and all of that was true
90 years ago
over the last 100 years psychoanalysis
has progressed and changed radically
from the early conjectures of freud
it's gone through a number of profound
iterations
and contemporary psychoanalytic theory
and technique is actually focused on
relationships as the bedrock of human
psychology
furthermore psychoanalytic therapies
continue to show amazing effectiveness
in the treatment of numerous issues but
they particularly shine when it comes to
complex personality-based
psychopathologies
and i'll link some studies in the
comments
the main perspective that i use in
thinking about narcissism is called
self-psychology it's one branch on the
tree of psychoanalytic theory
self-psychology was founded by heinz
kohut it's a radical re-examination of
the origins of selfhood
centering and contextualizing
the development of the self in our most
early relationships and following the
course of that self-development through
the lifespan it's grounded in compassion
and empathy
in fact self-psychology promotes the
experience of empathy as the most
important factor in the development of a
healthy self and it also promotes it as
the most important tool in the therapist
toolbox when treating narcissism
narcissists according to kohut
suffer from a chronic lack of empathy
you can't give what you haven't got
to heal npd there must be an intensive
and prolonged period in which the
patient is simply soaking up the
therapist's empathy
much like a very young child soaks up
their parents empathy
we discover ourselves
through empathic interactions with
others
so here's my advice to find treatment
most large cities have a psychoanalytic
society of some kind or other
look them up
send an email to their contact asking
for a referral even if you don't live
near a large city there's probably one
somewhere in your state
and many clinicians currently
are doing online therapy most clinicians
who are affiliated with such an
organization will have a psychoanalytic
perspective on narcissism which means
that they understand it as a form of
early relational trauma
even if they know little to nothing else
about it
this simple paradigm will make a world
of difference in their ability to
provide a consistent empathic response
in treatment
furthermore analytic therapists are
focused on the therapy relationship
they're less concerned about symptoms
and surface level presentation and
they're less concerned about skills
development and diagnosis they focus on
what is happening in the here and now
relationship which is exactly where the
focus needs to be to treat npd now this
isn't foolproof advice when you're
looking for someone ask them the
following question
how do you understand narcissistic
pathology
if their response mentions self-esteem
difficulties
shame
early wounds to the developing self an
interplay between grandiose and
vulnerable self-states or negotiating a
series of pushes and pulls in the
therapy relationship then you probably
found a keeper
alternatively if they focus on access to
cluster b or superficial things like
pride entitlement fantasies of
perfection or mention anything about
malignant narcissism machiavellianism
characterize narcissists as abusers or
say anything that sounds sort of
othering about the disorder then find
someone else now you should expect to
pay more for a psychoanalytic therapist
but you should also know that most
clinicians in private practice keep a
few low fee spots
don't be afraid to ask for that if you
genuinely can't afford full fee
you may also be able to negotiate less
frequent meetings
therapy will take longer if you meet
less often but something is better than
nothing
okay so i also want to address the
question of whether therapy is even
necessary
why can't you simply heal yourself
well to be perfectly honest a
significant proportion of healing does
take place on your own
but after more than a decade of focusing
on this disorder i'm convinced that
self-treatment alone is not sufficient
and here's why
the early emotional wounds that set
narcissistic pathology in motion
interfere with the development of
accurate self-perception
narcissism is a disorder characterized
by deficits deficits in the ability to
perceive self in others
deficits in the ability to manage and
maintain realistic self-esteem
deficits and coping and deficits in
interpersonal communication
donald winicott a famous psychoanalyst
and pediatrician who coined the term
false self
said it like this
he said
in individual emotional development the
precursor of the mirror
is the mother's face
the mother gazes at the baby in her arms
and the baby gazes at his mother's face
and finds himself therein
provided that the mother is really
looking at the unique small helpless
being and not projecting her own
expectations fears and plans for the
child
in that case
the child would not find himself in the
mother's face but rather the mother's
own projections
this child would remain without a mirror
and for the rest of his life would be
seeking this mirror in vain
so to sum it up what winnicott is saying
is that we discover ourself
through interactions with other people
the self is fundamentally
relational it only exists in relation to
others there's no such thing as a self
without other so if narcissism is the
disorder of the self
in which the development of the self has
been stunted
then the way to repair this deficit is
through a specific kind of interaction
with
and other
in this case it's the interaction with
the therapist
nowhere else will you find a person
trained to provide this kind of quote
re-parenting to give the consistent
positive empathically attuned mirroring
that the self needs to grow and develop
therapists are also trained
to provide a special set of boundaries
that protects both you and them from the
anger resentment and envy that reside
inside of a damaged self
allowing those feelings to emerge in
productive ways that facilitate and
deepen the relationship rather than
becoming a sort of toxic poison pill
that causes the relationship to end
you won't find this with a friend or a
partner or a boss or a mentor
you need a therapist
now you can and should research this
disorder on your own
you should try to find available
resources to support you on your journey
like this podcast
but
parts of you need to be discovered
and they can only be meaningfully
discovered by another person
another favorite winnicott quote on this
issue goes like this
it's a joy to be hidden
but disaster not to be found narcissism
is in some ways a disorder that's caused
by
quote not having been found
not having been seen or discovered
that which was never discovered in you
remains hidden even to yourself
and this is the deficit in the self that
makes you dependent on continual
feedback from others
only in therapy
will you be able to
slowly let go of that interpersonal
dependency for quote narcissistic supply
as you slowly gain more internal
resources and a clearer perspective on
yourself
and as you see yourself more clearly
you'll also see others more clearly
okay so i hope that helps
please be sure to leave questions and
comments and if you find this material
helpful i hope you will consider sharing
it or recommending it to others who you
feel might also find it helpful
and until next time take good care
[Music]
you